Add User Scripts API proposal (#331)
hober/web-extensions: proposals/user-scripts-api.md

2. **Stronger enforcement of remotely hosted code abuse.**  A distinct namespace allows people to more clearly see where user scripts features are being used and more easily spot abuse patterns.
3. **Easier engineering implementation.**  Browser vendors should be able to restrict the execution world and different API methods behind features.
4. **Introduce a user script world with custom CSP.**  Allow user scripts to opt-in to a more secure world that is only available in this namespace.

### API Schema
#### Types
```
dictionary RegisteredUserScript {
  boolean? allFrames;
  string code;
  string[]? excludeMatches;
  string id;
  string[]? matches;
  RunAt runAt;
  // Allows `USER_SCRIPT` (default) and `MAIN`
  // and returns error for `ISOLATED`.
  ExecutionWorld? world; 
  string[]? includeGlobs;
  string[]? excludeGlobs;
}

dictionary UserScriptFilter {
  string[]? ids;
}
```
#### Methods
```
browser.userScripts.register(
  scripts: RegisteredUserScript[],
  callback?: function
)

browser.userScripts.unregister(
  filter?: UserScriptFilter[],
  callback?: function
)
browser.userScripts.getScripts(
  filter?: UserScriptFilter[],
  callback?: function
)

> 
> browser.userScripts.update(
>   scripts?: RegisteredUserScript[],
>   callback?: function
> )
> ```
> 
> ### Requirements
> #### A. A mechanism to execute code in the main world
> - User scripts can be registered in the `MAIN` world.
> - Extension can customize the `USER_SCRIPT` world CSP to inject a script tag into the host page (expanded in requirement B)
> 
> #### B. The ability to execute code (with a separate CSP) in a world different from the main world and the extension's isolated world
> ##### `USER_SCRIPT World
> - Isolated from the web page (similar to other isolated worlds), but will be un-permissioned.  It will not have access to any extension APIs or cross-origin exceptions (these don't exist in Chrome, but do in other browsers).
> - Exempt from the page's CSP (see Relax CSP).
> - Share DOM with the web page.  Code from both worlds cannot directly interact with each other, except through DOM APIs.
> - Can communicate with different JS worlds via `window.postMessage()`.  A dedicated API to communicate between worlds is being considered as part of future work.
> When an asymmetric security relationship may exist, the `MAIN` world is considered to be less privileged than the `USER_SCRIPT` world
> ##### Relax CSP
> ```
> browser.userScripts.configureWorld(
>   csp: string
> )
> ```
> - Extension can customize the `USER_SCRIPT` world CSP. This will only affect scripts registered for the `USER_SCRIPT` world.  Scripts registered for the MAIN world will abide by the main world CSP.
> - By default, the `USER_SCRIPT` world CSP is undefined.
> - When `USER_SCRIPT` is undefined, the user agent will fall back to the extension’s `ISOLATED` world CSP
> 
> #### C. A separate user script permission
> - A new extension permission will be added, and will be required in order to register user scripts.  This permission should be scoped specifically to the purpose of user scripts (as opposed to a general "remotely-hosted code" permission).
> - Browser vendors then can use it to:
>   - Inform their review pipeline that this is a particularly risky extension, and extra caution should be taken to ensure this is a valid use of the API.
>   - Reduce the likelihood of extensions using it for other purposes and allows browser vendors to act on any permissions that do as being non-compliant
>   - Present the user with different permission warnings, UI, or other gating, if they deem it necessary.
> 
> #### D. Communication between JavaScript worlds
> As mentioned in requirement A, the user script world can communicate with different JS worlds via `window.postMessage()` and DOM APIs. New communication methods are being considered as potential future enhancements.
> 
> ###  Other considerations
> - When multiple scripts match and have the same runAt schedule, the execution order is:
>   - Scripts registered via the content_scripts key in the manifest file
>   - Scripts registered via scripting.registerContentScripts
>   - Scripts registered via userScripts.register
> - This ordering allows the extension to prepare the execution environment before the user script code is executed.
> - User scripts are always persisted across sessions, since the opposite behavior would be uncommon
> 
> ### Browser level restrictions
> From here, each browser vendor should be able to implement their own restrictions. Chrome is exploring limiting the access to this API when the user has enabled developer mode (bug), but permission grants are outside of the scope of this API proposal. 
> 
> ## (Potential) Future Enhacements
> ### `USER_SCRIPT` World Communication
> In the future, we may want to provide a more straightforward path for communication with a `USER_SCRIPT` world (as opposed to the postMessage() approach highlighted above).
> Separate `USER_SCRIPT` Worlds
> In addition to specifying the execution world of `USER_SCRIPT`, we could allow extensions to provide an identifier for the world.  Scripts injected with the same identifier would inject in the same world, while scripts with different world identifiers inject in different worlds.  This would allow for greater isolation between user scripts (if, for instance, the user had multiple unrelated user scripts injecting on the same page).
> ### Execute user scripts one time
> Currently, user scripts are registered and executed every time it matches the origin in a persistent way. We may explore a way to execute a user script only one time to provide a new capability to user scripts (e.g `browser.userScripts.execute()`
> 
> ## Discussion Guidelines
> Please keep discussion to the first iteration introduced by this proposal. Future enhacements can be tracked in the WECG [issue tracker](https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues).

Reviewer: This suggestion inserts a newline after every header and between paragraphs. It also addresses some rendering issuers where multiple paragraphs were combined into a single paragraph because Markdown requires the extra newline to distinguish between new paragraphs and text that has been wrapped due to character length restrictions.

```suggestion
## Background

### User Scripts and User Scripts Managers

[User scripts](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Userscript) are (usually relatively small) snippets of code that are injected into web pages in order to modify the page's appearance or behavior.  User script managers are a type of extension that is used to manage the collection of these user scripts, determining when and how to inject them on web pages.

User scripts can be created directly by the user or found in a number of different user script repositories around the web.

### Manifest V3

Manifest Version 3 (MV3) restricts the ability for extensions to use remotely-hosted code since it is a major security risk (cannot review or audit code that isn't in the extension package).  This is directly at odds with user script managers, which fundamentally require the execution of arbitrary code (the user scripts themselves).  This creates a feature gap between MV2 and MV3.

## Goal

User scripts satisfy an important use case for power users, allowing them to quickly and easily tweak the functionality of a web page.  Therefore, we propose adding a **new API to register user scripts with arbitrary code** targeted specifically for user scripts.  However, we will also take a number of steps to help reduce the abuse-ability of this API and ensure we don't lose the benefits of the remotely-hosted code restrictions from MV3.

### Multi-phase design

User script support will have a multiphase design and implementation process. The initial implementation has the following goals:

- Achieving functional parity with MV2 for user scripts managers
- Setting the foundations needed for future enhancements
- Limiting abusability

### Initial Requirements

The rest of this proposal focuses on the first iteration with the following requirements:

- **(A)** A mechanism to execute code in the main world 
- **(B)** The ability to execute code (with a separate CSP) in a world different from the main world and the extension's isolated world
- **(C)** A separate user script permission
- **(D)** Communication between JavaScript worlds

## Proposal

### New Namespace

User scripting related features will be exposed in a new API namespace, tentatively named "userScripts". The proposal authors favor the use of a new namespace for several reasons.

1. **Better set developer expectations.**  The clear separation between user and content scripts will reduce confusion for developers for which API methods to use and what the capabilities / restrictions of each are.  This naming also more clearly communicates that this capability is not meant as a general purpose way to inject arbitrary scripts.

2. **Stronger enforcement of remotely hosted code abuse.**  A distinct namespace allows people to more clearly see where user scripts features are being used and more easily spot abuse patterns.

3. **Easier engineering implementation.**  Browser vendors should be able to restrict the execution world and different API methods behind features.

4. **Introduce a user script world with custom CSP.**  Allow user scripts to opt-in to a more secure world that is only available in this namespace.

### API Schema

#### Types

```
dictionary RegisteredUserScript {
  boolean? allFrames;
  string code;
  string[]? excludeMatches;
  string id;
  string[]? matches;
  RunAt runAt;
  // Allows `USER_SCRIPT` (default) and `MAIN`
  // and returns error for `ISOLATED`.
  ExecutionWorld? world; 
  string[]? includeGlobs;
  string[]? excludeGlobs;
}

dictionary UserScriptFilter {
  string[]? ids;
}
```

#### Methods

```
browser.userScripts.register(
  scripts: RegisteredUserScript[],
  callback?: function
)

browser.userScripts.unregister(
  filter?: UserScriptFilter[],
  callback?: function
)
browser.userScripts.getScripts(
  filter?: UserScriptFilter[],
  callback?: function
)

browser.userScripts.update(
  scripts?: RegisteredUserScript[],
  callback?: function
)
```

### Requirements

#### A. A mechanism to execute code in the main world

- User scripts can be registered in the `MAIN` world.
- Extension can customize the `USER_SCRIPT` world CSP to inject a script tag into the host page (expanded in requirement B)

#### B. The ability to execute code (with a separate CSP) in a world different from the main world and the extension's isolated world

##### `USER_SCRIPT World

- Isolated from the web page (similar to other isolated worlds), but will be un-permissioned.  It will not have access to any extension APIs or cross-origin exceptions (these don't exist in Chrome, but do in other browsers).
- Exempt from the page's CSP (see Relax CSP).
- Share DOM with the web page.  Code from both worlds cannot directly interact with each other, except through DOM APIs.
- Can communicate with different JS worlds via `window.postMessage()`.  A dedicated API to communicate between worlds is being considered as part of future work.
When an asymmetric security relationship may exist, the `MAIN` world is considered to be less privileged than the `USER_SCRIPT` world

##### Relax CSP

```
browser.userScripts.configureWorld(
  csp: string
)
```

- Extension can customize the `USER_SCRIPT` world CSP. This will only affect scripts registered for the `USER_SCRIPT` world.  Scripts registered for the MAIN world will abide by the main world CSP.
- By default, the `USER_SCRIPT` world CSP is undefined.
- When `USER_SCRIPT` is undefined, the user agent will fall back to the extension’s `ISOLATED` world CSP

#### C. A separate user script permission

- A new extension permission will be added, and will be required in order to register user scripts.  This permission should be scoped specifically to the purpose of user scripts (as opposed to a general "remotely-hosted code" permission).
- Browser vendors then can use it to:
  - Inform their review pipeline that this is a particularly risky extension, and extra caution should be taken to ensure this is a valid use of the API.
  - Reduce the likelihood of extensions using it for other purposes and allows browser vendors to act on any permissions that do as being non-compliant
  - Present the user with different permission warnings, UI, or other gating, if they deem it necessary.

#### D. Communication between JavaScript worlds

As mentioned in requirement A, the user script world can communicate with different JS worlds via `window.postMessage()` and DOM APIs. New communication methods are being considered as potential future enhancements.

###  Other considerations

- When multiple scripts match and have the same runAt schedule, the execution order is:
  - Scripts registered via the content_scripts key in the manifest file
  - Scripts registered via scripting.registerContentScripts
  - Scripts registered via userScripts.register
- This ordering allows the extension to prepare the execution environment before the user script code is executed.
- User scripts are always persisted across sessions, since the opposite behavior would be uncommon

### Browser level restrictions

From here, each browser vendor should be able to implement their own restrictions. Chrome is exploring limiting the access to this API when the user has enabled developer mode (bug), but permission grants are outside of the scope of this API proposal. 

## (Potential) Future Enhancements

### `USER_SCRIPT` World Communication

In the future, we may want to provide a more straightforward path for communication with a `USER_SCRIPT` world (as opposed to the postMessage() approach highlighted above).

### Separate `USER_SCRIPT` Worlds

In addition to specifying the execution world of `USER_SCRIPT`, we could allow extensions to provide an identifier for the world.  Scripts injected with the same identifier would inject in the same world, while scripts with different world identifiers inject in different worlds.  This would allow for greater isolation between user scripts (if, for instance, the user had multiple unrelated user scripts injecting on the same page).

### Execute user scripts one time

Currently, user scripts are registered and executed every time it matches the origin in a persistent way. We may explore a way to execute a user script only one time to provide a new capability to user scripts (e.g `browser.userScripts.execute()`).

## Discussion Guidelines

Please keep discussion to the first iteration introduced by this proposal. Future enhancements can be tracked in the WECG [issue tracker](https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues).
```

Reviewer 2: @EmiliaPaz the changes weren't fully committed (the whole types are missing) due to code blocks in this suggestion block above, I think you might have to do it manually.

#### C. A separate user script permission

- A new extension permission will be added, and will be required in order to register user scripts.  This permission should be scoped specifically to the purpose of user scripts (as opposed to a general "remotely-hosted code" permission).
- Browser vendors then can use it to:
  - Inform their review pipeline that this is a particularly risky extension, and extra caution should be taken to ensure this is a valid use of the API.
  - Reduce the likelihood of extensions using it for other purposes and allows browser vendors to act on any permissions that do as being non-compliant
  - Present the user with different permission warnings, UI, or other gating, if they deem it necessary.

#### D. Communication between JavaScript worlds

As mentioned in requirement A, the user script world can communicate with different JS worlds via `window.postMessage()` and DOM APIs. New communication methods are being considered as potential future enhancements.

###  Other considerations

- When multiple scripts match and have the same runAt schedule, the execution order is:
  - Scripts registered via the content_scripts key in the manifest file

>   - Scripts registered via scripting.registerContentScripts

Reviewer 3: Where is `scripting.registerContentScripts` defined?

Author: https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/reference/scripting/#method-registerContentScripts

Reviewer 3: Please link that in the document.

Author: Done!

# User Scripts API

## Background

### User Scripts and User Scripts Managers

> [User scripts](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Userscript) are (usually relatively small) snippets of code that are injected into web pages in order to modify the page's appearance or behavior.  User script managers are a type of extension that is used to manage the collection of these user scripts, determining when and how to inject them on web pages.

Reviewer 4: For the API design, it's relevant to consider that there are scripts requiring access to JS in the page's context and/or whether they need access to the user script API. As seen in the table at "Background" at https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1309614401

The world + code part of this proposal fully covers the first two rows.

The (existing) scripting API plus its (existing) main world covers the third row.

The fourth row (i.e. page access + user script API access) is being addressed by the proposed CSP relaxation here. That chosen approach removes the ability for the browser to take control of the injection though (but this is already an issue in MV2, so that could be iterated on later).

## Goal

User scripts satisfy an important use case for power users, allowing them to quickly and easily tweak the functionality of a web page.  Therefore, we propose adding a **new API to register user scripts with arbitrary code** targeted specifically for user scripts.  However, we will also take a number of steps to help reduce the abuse-ability of this API and ensure we don't lose the benefits of the remotely-hosted code restrictions from MV3.

### Multi-phase design

User script support will have a multiphase design and implementation process.  The initial implementation has the following goals:

- Achieving functional parity with MV2 for user scripts managers
- Setting the foundations needed for future enhancements
- Limiting abusability

### Initial Requirements

The rest of this proposal focuses on the first iteration with the following requirements:

- **(A)** A mechanism to execute code in the main world
- **(B)** The ability to execute code (with a separate CSP) in a world different from the main world and the extension's isolated world
- **(C)** A separate user script permission

> - **(D)** Communication between JavaScript worlds

Reviewer 4: Not just any communication, but a secure communication, one that cannot be intercepted by hostile code running in the same world.

Author: Secure communication between Javascript worlds is not a requirement, because it's also insecure in MV2. However, it is desirable and such is noted in the proposal.

User scripting related features will be exposed in a new API namespace, tentatively named `userScripts`.  The proposal authors favor the use of a new namespace for several reasons.

1. **Better set developer expectations.**  The clear separation between user and content scripts will reduce confusion for developers for which API methods to use and what the capabilities / restrictions of each are.  This naming also more clearly communicates that this capability is not meant as a general purpose way to inject arbitrary scripts.

2. **Stronger enforcement of remotely hosted code abuse.**  A distinct namespace allows people to more clearly see where user scripts features are being used and more easily spot abuse patterns.

3. **Easier engineering implementation.**  Browser vendors should be able to restrict the execution world and different API methods behind features.

4. **Introduce a user script world with custom CSP.**  Allow user scripts to opt-in to a more secure world that is only available in this namespace.

### API Schema

#### Types

```
dictionary RegisteredUserScript {
  boolean? allFrames;
  string code;
  string[]? excludeMatches;
  string id;
  string[]? matches;

>   RunAt runAt;

Reviewer 5: [Many userscripts](https://greasyfork.org/en/scripts/code-search?c=document-body) need `document_body` which means the moment the `<body>` element appears. If this mode is not implemented in Chrome natively, each USM will have to re-implement it via a workaround that may behave differently.

  // Allows `USER_SCRIPT` (default) and `MAIN`
  // and returns error for `ISOLATED`.
  ExecutionWorld? world;

>   string[]? includeGlobs;

Reviewer 4: At the implementation level, make sure that `includeGlobs` and `matches` are disjunctions, not conjunctions - as mentioned at https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1311037536

Author: This makes sense.

  string[]? excludeGlobs;
}
dictionary UserScriptFilter {
  string[]? ids;
}
```

#### Methods

```
browser.userScripts.register(
  scripts: RegisteredUserScript[],
  callback?: function
)
browser.userScripts.unregister(
  filter?: UserScriptFilter[],
  callback?: function
)
browser.userScripts.getScripts(
  filter?: UserScriptFilter[],
  callback?: function
)
browser.userScripts.update(
  scripts?: RegisteredUserScript[],
  callback?: function
)
```

### Requirements

#### A. A mechanism to execute code in the main world

- User scripts can be registered in the `MAIN` world.

> - Extension can customize the `USER_SCRIPT` world's CSP to inject a script tag into the host page (expanded in requirement B)

Reviewer 4: With this intended mechanism of unblocking user script managers in the transition to MV3, the minimum necessary to support user script managers is just to allow then to insert inline script elements in the web page, from the content script (not necessarily a user script world).

The current proposal proposes a runtime method to override the CSP of the user script world. The dynamic aspect of the runtime API is not required, a static manifest key would be enough for the use case. This feature existed before in the form of the `content_security_policy.isolated_world` manifest key but was dropped in https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src.git/+/345390adf6505881f84da2351c3e4fc1b06dac26%5E%21/ after concerns over the ability to enforce it.

To unblock the user script managers from transitioning from MV2 to MV3, it would suffice to allow the CSP for content scripts to be customized, to relax the current [MV3 CSP](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1m82BcCPWDTEzy1R6gbCbUwe-ma-bCTTF_JwRnt3O_IA/edit) requirements by accepting [`'unsafe-inline'`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Security-Policy/script-src#unsafe_inline_script) too. With this added relaxation, the least secure CSP that the extension can have is `script-src 'self' 'wasm-unsafe-eval' 'unsafe-inline'`. Because this still excludes `unsafe-eval`, extensions cannot have arbitrary RCE in the (privileged) content script world, while still being able to run inline code in the main world.

The approach sketched in this comment meets requirements A, B and D (D because the extension can try to carefully sets up its own channel, which it can because it controls the script injection). Requirement C is independent and optional: because the feature is toggled through the manifest.json file, its presence can be statically detected by the browser and automated scanners and/or reviewers.

Author: If I am reading correctly, there are two proposals here (and in the next [comment](https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/pull/331/files#r1048568036)): 
1. Relax the current MV3 CSP requirements in the extension `ISOLATED` world by accepting 'unsafe-inline' too, or
2. Static user script world customization in the manifest

For 1.,`’unsafe_inline’` allows remote host code. Thus, we cannot allow it in the extension `ISOLATED` world as it
would affect all content scripts and not just user scripts.

For 2., static world customization is easier, since most extensions will set the user script manifest, and makes it easier for revision. However, dynamic world customization allows to dynamically change CSP. This can be useful for user script managers as they can set the CSP based on the user scripts. Additionally, in the future we would like to have separate `USER_SCRIPT` worlds. Having manifest entries for each world would be messy, thus a method is preferred.
Thus, dynamic CSP customization is better for user script managers overall and allows for extensibility.

Reviewer 6: Thanks for the comments, Rob and Emilia!

@Rob--W : As Emilia points out, the main reason for not just allowing unsafe-inline in an isolated world CSP is that we want to gate this behavior on the user script permission.  Additionally, only allowing it in the user script world (rather than in the main isolated world) limits the permission of that code, which is also desirable.

> Because this still excludes unsafe-eval, extensions cannot have arbitrary RCE in the (privileged) content script world, while still being able to run inline code in the main world.

I disagree with this.  `unsafe-inline` is sufficient to have full remote code execution, AFAIK.  Consider:
```
(async () => {
  let fetchResult = await fetch(...);
  let evilCode = await fetchResult.text();
  let scriptTag = document.createElement('script');
  let scriptTag.text = evilCode;
  document.body.appendChild(scriptTag);
})();
```

This will execute any arbitrarily-fetched code and requires only `unsafe-inline` (not `unsafe-eval`).  Because of this, we don't want to allow arbitrary content scripts to have this relaxed CSP.

As you've correctly highlighted, our _first_ goal here is to allow user script managers to migrate to MV3.  We'd like to provide them with more capabilities in the future (including some form of secure inter-world communication) and allow the browser to take on more of the injection duties; this is something we'll continue iterating on.  But we'd like this initial version to unblock the transition such that user script managers can behave similarly to how they do in MV2.

To clarify: If we provide the capabilities outlined in this proposal (the ability to inject arbitrary code into a less-permissioned user script world that has a relaxed CSP), do you agree user script managers should be able to migrate?

Reviewer 7: It may also be relevant to consider how many userscripts would cease to function without certain capabilities, even if the bare functioning of the userscript manager itself is migrated.

Reviewer 8: > To clarify: If we provide the capabilities outlined in this proposal (the ability to inject arbitrary code into a less-permissioned user script world that has a relaxed CSP), do you agree user script managers should be able to migrate?

@rdcronin It depends. 

Being able to execute arbitrary code in a userscript world is one step and some scripts would already work then, but many userscripts need access to `unsafeWindow` which is the main world window object. 

So either the userscript world can access the main world window object like the `contentWindow` of an iframe or "has a relaxed CSP" means the userscript world is able to inject arbitrary code into the page and this code is exempt from the page's CSP (like script tags injected by a content script in mv2).

Reviewer 5: > I disagree with this. unsafe-inline is sufficient to have full remote code execution, AFAIK. Consider:

Not cool. Your example runs code in the "main world" thus actually confirming Rob's quote that says you cannot do it in the "(privileged) content script world" meaning the "isolated world". I guess you call scripts in the main world "content scripts" too, which is a big mistake with longstanding negative consequences as I pointed out in #313 and will elaborate further in a new issue once I gather more info.

If your example is about a chrome-extension:// page, it's irrelevant as they have their own CSP.

> To clarify: If we provide the capabilities outlined in this proposal (the ability to inject arbitrary code into a less-permissioned user script world that has a relaxed CSP), do you agree user script managers should be able to migrate?

No for Violentmonkey/Tampermonkey as I've pointed out in https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/pull/331#issuecomment-1340551102. TLDR: current proposal will turn these extensions into wide-open backdoors due to the lack of a secure non-spoofable method of communication.

Reviewer 6: @derjanb :

> So either the userscript world can access the main world window object like the contentWindow of an iframe or "has a relaxed CSP" means the userscript world is able to inject arbitrary code into the page and this code is exempt from the page's CSP (like script tags injected by a content script in mv2).

My thinking was that we could do the latter; I assumed this would be necessary for many scripts that needed to inject in the main world because they wouldn't be prepared to content with the page's CSP.

@tophf :

> Your example runs code in the "main world" thus actually confirming Rob's quote that says you cannot do it in the "(privileged) content script world" meaning the "isolated world"

Sorry, I was unclear.  My read of Rob's comment was "because unsafe-inline doesn't allow RHC execution, we could just allow it in (all) MV3 extension isolated worlds (not just userscript worlds)."  I disagree that we could allow this without opening up more risk.  (We know that this is still possible in MV3 today; for our stance on remotely-hosted code, see [this FAQ entry](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/main/extensions/docs/security_faq.md#I_ve-found-written-an-extension-that-can-execute-code-from-a-remote-server_Is-this-a-security-bug).)

In MV3, script injected by an extension today should always be subject to a CSP — either the isolated world's CSP (which is the minimum MV3 CSP) if the script is running in the isolated world, or else the page's CSP if the script is running in the main world.  This is different from MV2, where scripts injected by the isolated world into the main world bypass the page's CSP.  Related to the comment above, my understanding is that in order to allow userscripts to function similarly to how they do in MV2, we would need to allow this CSP bypass in MV3 as well.  And if we do that, we effectively allow extensions to have arbitrary RHC running.  For userscripts, thi sis acceptable (it's the whole point), but for this reason, we don't want to just relax the minimum CSP in the extension isolated worlds to allow `unsafe-inline`.  We would want to limit this by only having this type of CSP relaxation for the userscript worlds.

> No for Violentmonkey/Tampermonkey as I've pointed out in https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/pull/331#issuecomment-1340551102. TLDR: current proposal will turn these extensions into wide-open backdoors due to the lack of a secure non-spoofable method of communication.

As mentioned above, our goal is to first begin by supporting the same style of injection that is leveraged by USMs in MV2 (first version), and continue iterating to allow the browser to do more of the lifting for user script injection (subsequent versions).  I understand (and agree) that a separate, secure communication channel is necessary before the browser can take on more of the user script injection directly (this is why that communication mechanism is called out in the "Future Enhancements" section.  With the current proposal (for relaxed CSP in user script worlds), does the current MV2 mechanism of retrieving a safe builtin method (retrieving it from a temporary iframe) behave differently?  Why so?

Reviewer 5: The same secret random id of CustomEvent is necessary both in the isolated world and in the world of the userscript (main or unique) to establish the internal userscript API. I don't see how it can be possible with the current proposal. This is what the secure communication channel is for or allowing unsafe-inline for the isolated world. I think there's some misunderstanding of the problem on your part: can you show how an extension can execute arbitrary code in the *isolated* world with CSP that has unsafe-inline?

**Edit:** in case you're worried that an extension's `script` can bypass the CSP of the page and thus execute arbitrary code in the main world, it's already possible even with the current restrictions if the extension creates the `script` element inside the code that already runs in the main world. An extension can also override or remove the CSP of the page and allow its script in case there's no stricter CSP meta tag in the HTML of the page. In other words the current design of MV3 is not providing more security here on the platform level, it just necessitates an additional step and optionally encourages the authors to lower the site's security by removing its CSP.

**Edit2:** the idea for `unsafe-inline` was pitched as a temporary migration step for USM extensions, which are allowed to run arbitrary code by design, so MV3 "stance" on remote code doesn't apply here anyway. As for how to limit this ability, it may be a `userScripts` permission.

Reviewer 6: > in case you're worried that an extension's script can bypass the CSP of the page and thus execute arbitrary code in the main world, it's already possible even with the current restrictions...

Yes, this is our concern.  As I mentioned above, we know this is already possible; again, see the FAQ entry [here](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/main/extensions/docs/security_faq.md#I_ve-found-written-an-extension-that-can-execute-code-from-a-remote-server_Is-this-a-security-bug).  Inlined:

> While the platform includes some restrictions through the inclusion of a default content security policy for extensions, this is not meant to be a guaranteed deterrent, and does not prevent all types of remote code execution.

Our goal with MV3 RHC restrictions at the platform level is to _actively discourage_ the use of RHC; it's impossible to fully prevent it at the platform level.  However, where possible, we should prevent it or put in guardrails.  This serves two purposes: a) it helps well-meaning developers realize they might be doing something that's not allowed (e.g. when a copy-pasted solution from stack overflow doesn't work), and b) it gives manual and automated review systems more signals if developers are deliberately bypassing it.

As you mention, we can limit this to extensions that have the `userScripts` permission, which is the intention of this proposal.  It's cleanest if we can have this relaxation apply only to the user script world, because it makes the behavior of those different types of execution worlds clearer: the content script isolated worlds never allow this relaxed CSP; the user script worlds always do (as opposed to "the content script isolated worlds sometimes do, if this particular permission is present and granted in the manifest").

> The same secret random id of CustomEvent is necessary both in the isolated world and in the world of the userscript (main or unique) to establish the internal userscript API.

My understanding is that, today, a number of USMs use synchronous XHRs from the injected content script to retrieve relevant scripts; this would now happen in the userscript world, but could the content script isolated world still rely on a sync XHR to receive a secret ID, and have the background context handle ensuring the same secret ID is vended to the userscript world and content script isolated world for a given document?

Reviewer 5: > Our goal with MV3 RHC restrictions at the platform level
> it helps well-meaning developers

These are half-measures, they never work, especially for this problem where an easy workaround exists in most cases. Thousands of well-meaning developers would use it to keep providing well-meaning enhancements in their extensions that were unreasonably broken by _decorative_ restrictions in MV3.

> synchronous XHRs 

No, it won't work.
1. it's an optional kludge with its own problems, so it's not enabled by default and actually discouraged;
2. the secret cookie will be easily extractable by sites which can see it in a secondary same-origin environment before document_start scripts run thanks to https://crbug.com/1261964
3. thanks to the same bug the main world cannot use `document.cookie` as it may be spoofed
4. we can't set a random new id for each frame in response header and ensure it's actually used in time by a fast site as there's no webRequestBlocking for normal extensions;
5. declarativeNetRequest doesn't allow to set headers for frameId or documentId
6. even if we set the header asynchronously via declarativeNetRequest it won't work on sites that use onfetch in their service worker so we'd have to nuke it every time, which is a deal-breaker.
7. synchronous XHR may be disabled via FeaturePolicy in the frame/page
8. `document.cookie` may be unavailable if the browser is configured to reject cookies

Reviewer 4: In response to @rdcronin at https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/pull/331#discussion_r1057885197 ,

> > Your example runs code in the "main world" thus actually confirming Rob's quote that says you cannot do it in the "(privileged) content script world" meaning the "isolated world"
> 
> Sorry, I was unclear. My read of Rob's comment was "because unsafe-inline doesn't allow RHC execution, we could just allow it in (all) MV3 extension isolated worlds (not just userscript worlds)." I disagree that we could allow this without opening up more risk.

Opening up to all extensions obviously carries more risk. That's why I explicitly called out a way to satisfy requirement C at the end of my initial comment, to restrict the capability to USM extensions. If that is followed, the risk of both approaches would be comparable.
My reasoning behind the original comment is as follows:

1. MV2 user script manager's primary way to run code in the main world is to inject an inline `<script>`. The blocker to using this in MV3 is the enforced CSP in content scripts.
2. The proposal here advocates for an transition tool where USM extensions get access to a new USER_SCRIPT world.
3. One of the features of this USER_SCRIPT world is the ability to have an independent (empty) CSP. This originates from the desire of having user scripts being exempt from the CSP.
   - This specific feature is the key for USM migration to MV3. Not because of the greatness of the API design, but because this CSP exemption can be used as a hack to restore the `<script>` injection in the page, so that the MV3 USM works exactly like the MV2 USM.
   - All of the other parts of the "userScripts" API design are inconsequential; the only part that matters is the lack of CSP.
4. From the security POV, there is no difference between script injection from a content script (ISOLATED) world or the USER_SCRIPT world.
   - On the contrary, if the USER_SCRIPT world is the only way to run code in the main world, then USM extensions cannot run third-party user scripts in the USER_SCRIPT world ("sandbox") that shields the user script from the web page, or the USM from the extension.
5. From the policy POV (requirement C stated by Emilia), the use of `'unsafe-inline'` in `content_security_policy.isolated_world` can be guarded by a userScripts permission/user controls if desired.
6. For the use case of code execution of user scripts in the main world, the proposed API is not an improvement over the status quo. Neither is the `content_security_policy.isolated_world`. However, the latter is easier to transition to for USM extension devs, and has a smaller footprint in the browser (implementation and runtime overhead).
   - Note: independently of the main world use case, user script execution in the USER_SCRIPT world does have value. If that's puzzling, see the Background / table at https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1309614401.

My feedback above responds to the frame of this PR, i.e. relaxing the CSP to unblock USM. I would actually have preferred a method without relaxing the CSP, see below.
 
> my understanding is that in order to allow userscripts to function similarly to how they do in MV2, we would need to allow this CSP bypass in MV3 as well.

The CSP bypass is not strictly necessary. In an earlier kick-off (summarized at https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1326736211 ), I advocated for a dedicated content script-specific method to (synchronously) run code (string) in the main world, because that removes the `<script>` + CSP implementation detail, and it can easily be extended with the ability to pass parameters securely. The advantage of this approach over CSP-based approach is that the unique capabilities of this would be more generally useful to other extensions (e.g. #284), not just USM.

For example (side note: "secretValue" may be leaked if the page overrides `window.alert`):

```lang=js
browser.scriptingContent.executeScript({
  args: ["secretValue"],
  code: "alert(secret);", // <-- Requires userScripts permission.
  argNames: ["secret"],
});
```

Example without `code`, without requiring userScripts permission:

```lang=js
browser.scriptingContent.executeScript({
  args: ["secretValue"],
  func: (secret) => {
    alert(secret);
  },
});
```

Another example (but then with browser-injected scripts instead of content script-injected scripts) is at the end of https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1309614401 under the "Scripting API with cross-world communication" header.

Reviewer 6: @tophf , @derjanb , @Rob--W : I feel like I've heard (and continue to hear) significantly different descriptions of both how USMs are typically operating in MV2 and what would be necessary with a userScript permission or API to allow them to migrate to MV3.

Ask: is there (or can we produce) an overview of how USMs are implementing script injection in MV2 so that we can ensure we're on the same page?

As we've stated before, our initial goal here is to unblock migration, and so figuring out the pieces necessary to enable the same type of functionality in MV3 is the first step.

@Rob--W 
> Opening up to all extensions obviously carries more risk. That's why I explicitly called out a way to satisfy requirement C at the end of my initial comment, to restrict the capability to USM extensions. If that is followed, the risk of both approaches would be comparable.

Agreed the security implications are the same if we restrict the availability to extensions with the userScript permission, but as I mentioned above, I think it would be beneficial (from both an API design and documentation standpoint as well as an implementation perspective) if we limited this to the user script world, if that were to be sufficient.  From tophf's response, it sounds like it would not be.  If everyone agrees that's the case, I think it would be valuable to re-clarify the requirement not as "the ability to run arbitrary code in the main world, bypassing CSP", but rather "the ability for the extension's content script's ISOLATED_WORLD to inject arbitrary code in the main world, bypassing CSP".

> 4. From the security POV, there is no difference between script injection from a content script (ISOLATED) world or the USER_SCRIPT world.
> On the contrary, if the USER_SCRIPT world is the only way to run code in the main world, then USM extensions cannot run third-party user scripts in the USER_SCRIPT world ("sandbox") that shields the user script from the web page, or the USM from the extension.

I agree there is no security difference with regard to which world the script is injected from; however, I don't follow the second part:
* The USER_SCRIPT world is _not_ the only way to run code in the main world; extensions can do this (today) via either appending a script tag pointing to an extension resource or by specifying `world: 'main'` in `scripting.executeScript()`.
* The USER_SCRIPT world can be used to execute third-party user scripts in the USER_SCRIPT world if the extension registers those scripts with the (proposed) userScripts API.

> I advocated for a dedicated content script-specific method to (synchronously) run code (string) in the main world

I'm not opposed to this, but I don't think it would solve all the issues.  If we didn't have the CSP relaxation, then the script injected via that method would be subject to either the CSP of the page or the extension, either of which would likely break the user script.

Reviewer 4: > @tophf , @derjanb , @Rob--W : I feel like I've heard (and continue to hear) significantly different descriptions of both how USMs are typically operating in MV2 and what would be necessary with a userScript permission or API to allow them to migrate to MV3.
> 
> Ask: is there (or can we produce) an overview of how USMs are implementing script injection in MV2 so that we can ensure we're on the same page?

I have already described that in detail at https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1309614401 and summarized the main blocker again in https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1326736211 . As seen in the table from my first comment, there are two distinct use cases at play here: script execution in the main world, and script execution in an isolated world - each with their pros and cons in Chrome's MV2. And in both use cases, the CSP (the lack thereof) in MV2 content scripts becomes relevant:

- In the MAIN world use case, the enforcement of the CSP in the MV3 content script world is a hard blocker to having the functionality at all (inline `<script>` being blocked).
- In the USER_SCRIPT world use case, which supersedes the (insecure) use of MV2's ISOLATED world, a default CSP could potentially result in broken user scripts, if these user scripts relied on the absence of the CSP as has been the case in MV2's content script. This is probably why Jan asked for the USER_SCRIPT world's CSP to be customizable in https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1261954577 .
  - Note: emphasis on "insecure" use of MV2's ISOLATED world. The USM has content scripts running in the ISOLATED world to manage the execution of user scripts in the MAIN world. But sometimes these content scripts share their execution environment with other user scripts, e.g. [when `@sandbox DOM` is used (link to Tampermonkey docs)](https://www.tampermonkey.net/changelog.php?ext=dhdg#v4.18.0).
  - Since user scripts in the main world already need to account for arbitrary CSP of web pages, I don't view a custom CSP as a hard requirement for MV2->MV3 migration. I'll let @derjanb speak to the priority of this aspect.

> As we've stated before, our initial goal here is to unblock migration, and so figuring out the pieces necessary to enable the same type of functionality in MV3 is the first step.
> 
> @Rob--W
> 
> > Opening up to all extensions obviously carries more risk. That's why I explicitly called out a way to satisfy requirement C at the end of my initial comment, to restrict the capability to USM extensions. If that is followed, the risk of both approaches would be comparable.
> 
> Agreed the security implications are the same if we restrict the availability to extensions with the userScript permission, but as I mentioned above, I think it would be beneficial (from both an API design and documentation standpoint as well as an implementation perspective) if we limited this to the user script world, if that were to be sufficient.

In the most sensible API design, the USER_SCRIPT world would only run (third-party) user scripts.
In the proposed API, if the USER_SCRIPT world were to be the only way to run code in the MAIN world, then USM are forced to run the (relatively trusted) USM's user script injection logic in the USER_SCRIPT world.
The result is insecure by design... just like MV2 (replace "USER_SCRIPT" with "ISOLATED" and we have the same situation in MV2).

An alternative to offering the CSP relaxation to ISOLATED is to support multiple USER_SCRIPT worlds; then the USM extension could instantiate a USER_SCRIPT world that is not shared with third-party user scripts.

> > 4. From the security POV, there is no difference between script injection from a content script (ISOLATED) world or the USER_SCRIPT world.
> >    On the contrary, if the USER_SCRIPT world is the only way to run code in the main world, then USM extensions cannot run third-party user scripts in the USER_SCRIPT world ("sandbox") that shields the user script from the web page, or the USM from the extension.
> 
> I agree there is no security difference with regard to which world the script is injected from; however, I don't follow the second part:
> 
>     * The USER_SCRIPT world is _not_ the only way to run code in the main world; extensions can do this (today) via either appending a script tag pointing to an extension resource or by specifying `world: 'main'` in `scripting.executeScript()`.

We're talking about running user scripts in the main world, i.e. arbitrary strings. A `<script>` to an extension resource wouldn't offer arbitrary code execution. Even if `scripting.executeScript` were to be extended with a "code" parameter, then it can still not communicate securely with the USM in order to provide user script APIs ("GM", etc).

>     * The USER_SCRIPT world can be used to execute third-party user scripts in the USER_SCRIPT world if the extension registers those scripts with the (proposed) userScripts API.

Indeed, hence my previous remark "Note: independently of the main world use case, user script execution in the USER_SCRIPT world does have value.". The issue is code execution in the main world PLUS secure communication with it.

> > I advocated for a dedicated content script-specific method to (synchronously) run code (string) in the main world
> 
> I'm not opposed to this, but I don't think it would solve all the issues. If we didn't have the CSP relaxation, then the script injected via that method would be subject to either the CSP of the page or the extension, either of which would likely break the user script.

That is not unique to MV3. In MV2, user scripts in the main world already have to account for the page's CSP.

Reviewer 6: @Rob--W 

> I have already described that in detail at https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1309614401 and summarized the main blocker again in https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1326736211 .

From https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1326736211:

> The main blocker for user script managers in MV3 compared to MV2 is the inability to run strings as code in the main world (page’s context).

However, from tophf's comments, it seems this is incomplete.  If there's a mistake here, let's please work to get it clarified.

I'm hoping we can reach consensus on what is required in this API.  As always, there are multiple potential solutions, but the requirements should remain constant.  Main world script execution of arbitrary strings is a hard requirement; I think we're all agreed on that.  A separate, dedicated, secure-world communication channel (while I understand the desirability!) shouldn't be a hard requirement, since it doesn't exist in MV2 (and USMs continue to work in MV2).  The best way to establish the firm requirements of a new API here seems to be to have a canonical source for "here is how it works in MV2", so that we can begin highlighting a) how it can work in MV3 in a first version, to enable migration, and b) how we can continue iterating on that API to make it even better.

> In the MAIN world use case, the enforcement of the CSP in the MV3 content script world is a hard blocker to having the functionality at all (inline <script> being blocked).

Agreed.  We seem to have consensus on this.

> In the USER_SCRIPT world use case, which supersedes the (insecure) use of MV2's ISOLATED world, a default CSP could potentially result in broken user scripts, if these user scripts relied on the absence of the CSP as has been the case in MV2's content script. This is probably why Jan asked for the USER_SCRIPT world's CSP to be customizable in https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1261954577 .

Agreed.  I think having a customizable CSP in the USER_SCRIPT world (assuming the desire to run third-party scripts in that world, which it seems like we agree is desirable, especially longer term) is a requirement.  This is incorporated in the current proposal.

> Note: emphasis on "insecure" use of MV2's ISOLATED world. The USM has content scripts running in the ISOLATED world to manage the execution of user scripts in the MAIN world. But sometimes these content scripts share their execution environment with other user scripts, e.g. [when @sandbox DOM is used (link to Tampermonkey docs)](https://www.tampermonkey.net/changelog.php?ext=dhdg#v4.18.0).

Agreed.  We'd ideally isolate these (see also below).  This does not seem to be a hard blocker for migration (but is one we'd want to plan for).

> Since user scripts in the main world already need to account for arbitrary CSP of web pages, I don't view a custom CSP as a hard requirement for MV2->MV3 migration. I'll let @derjanb speak to the priority of this aspect.

In Chromium, a script tag injected by an isolated world in MV2 can bypass some of the CSP rules of the main page (beyond just the ability to append a script tag; the appended script tag itself can do more).  As I've mentioned in the past, this boundary is not well defined, but I don't know if we can reasonably say "user scripts already deal with all page CSPs".  I'd similarly like to have @derjanb 's input here.

> In the most sensible API design, the USER_SCRIPT world would only run (third-party) user scripts.

Agreed.  This is the direction we want to head towards, but we'll likely take an incremental approach.

> In the proposed API, if the USER_SCRIPT world were to be the only way to run code in the MAIN world, then USM are forced to run the (relatively trusted) USM's user script injection logic in the USER_SCRIPT world.

The USER_SCRIPT world is *not* the only way to run code in the main world, as I mentioned before.  I assume you meant "the USER_SCRIPT world is the only way to execute _arbitrary_ code in the main world"?  Even so, that's also not true -- under the proposed API, the USM can register a user script (with arbitrary code) to execute in the main world via the proposed `userScripts.register()` method, which accepts an `ExecutionWorld` property.  Is instead the requirement "arbitrary code with per-document customization"?

> The result is insecure by design... just like MV2 (replace "USER_SCRIPT" with "ISOLATED" and we have the same situation in MV2).

Even if this it's still not perfectly secure, this would still be more secure than MV2 (because the USER_SCRIPT world is less privileged than the ISOLATED world).  However, as mentioned above, I agree that we want to move in the direction of a situation where the USER_SCRIPT world is not just a replacement for the same mechanism as leveraged in MV2 (but again, we are targeting an iterative approach).

> An alternative to offering the CSP relaxation to ISOLATED is to support multiple USER_SCRIPT worlds; then the USM extension could instantiate a USER_SCRIPT world that is not shared with third-party user scripts.

Agreed; this is already called out in the "future work" section, and was the reason for the separate `configureCSP` method -- this allows both `register` and `configureCSP` to take a `customWorldId` parameter in the future.  (We don't want `register` to take a CSP property directly because the CSP is applied at a world-scope, rather than a script-scope.)

> We're talking about running user scripts in the main world, i.e. arbitrary strings. A <script> to an extension resource wouldn't offer arbitrary code execution. Even if scripting.executeScript were to be extended with a "code" parameter, then it can still not communicate securely with the USM in order to provide user script APIs ("GM", etc).

Understood; this is why I'm trying to get a clear, crisp set of requirements.  It's been mentioned multiple times that "all that's needed is to bypass main world CSP", but that seems very incomplete.  Breaking down some different levels here:
- Executing in the main world: trivially achievable today.
- Executing _arbitrary_ code in the main world: achievable with the proposed API (most directly and desirably by using `register` with `world: 'MAIN'`).
- Executing _arbitrary_ code _with pre-work code / known data_: I don't believe this has (fundamentally) different requirements than the above; since the code is arbitrary, the pre-work / known data can be included directly in the arbitrary code.
- Executing _arbitrary_ code with _per-document customization_: Possible with the proposed API, if the USM leverages the USER_SCRIPT world to construct an inline script tag.  (This also enables semi-private communication between the USER_SCRIPT world and main world script, in the same way it exists in MV2.)  In the future, we'd want to improve this, but it would unblock migration.
- Executing _arbitrary_ code with _per-document customization_ that is _shared between the ISOLATED world and USER_SCRIPT world_ (this seems to be the requirement tophf highlighted): This _might_ be possible with the proposed API, depending on the functionality USMs use today in MV2.  Again, this is where I've heard many conflicting descriptions, and would like more details.  If the current mechanisms are insufficient, it seems like this would be possible with the use of the dynamic params that are proposed for the scripting API, if we also exposed them to the USER_SCRIPT world.
- Executing _arbitrary_ code with _a dedicated, private communicated channel with shared references to objects_: Not possible in MV2 or with the proposed API.

Reviewer 5: [Reposting a polished version with more detailed analysis for reliability]

> Executing arbitrary code with per-document customization: Possible with the proposed API, if the USM leverages the USER_SCRIPT world to construct an inline script tag. (This also enables semi-private communication between the USER_SCRIPT world and main world script, in the same way it exists in MV2.) In the future, we'd want to improve this, but it would unblock migration.

But USM needs a **fully** private channel between the **isolated** world and the main world, which we do have in MV2 thanks to the extracted prototype methods and initializing in a way that can't be intercepted. For the new MV3 feature of USERSCRIPT world injection we'll also need a way to have the same random id (unique per document) in both worlds i.e. the isolated world needs this id regardless of the userscript's world.

> The main blocker for user script managers in MV3 compared to MV2 is the inability to run strings as code in the main world (page’s context). However, from tophf's comments, it seems this is incomplete. If there's a mistake here, let's please work to get it clarified.

The concept "run strings as code" is somewhat vague, so it creates misunderstanding. Registering per se is not enough: it should be done in a way that provides the same id to the isolated world and the script's world. In MV2 the isolated world controls the contents of the "string" so it can embed a random event id which will be used to establish the secure communication for the internal GM_xxx API and to extract the safe `prototype` methods from the iframe before initializing the channel in the MAIN world. Your proposed API doesn't provide such capability, so it's useless for USMs. The only case it solves is a userscript in [@unwrap](https://violentmonkey.github.io/api/metadata-block/#unwrap) mode, which is practically unused in the wild.

P.S. It worries me that I'm repeating the same thing over and over in vain. Maybe you should look at Violentmonkey's [inject.js](https://github.com/violentmonkey/violentmonkey/blob/master/src/injected/content/inject.js#L30). It's somewhat convoluted though because we need to circumvent https://crbug.com/1261964.

Reviewer 4: @rdcronin 
> @Rob--W
> 
> > I have already described that in detail at [#279 (comment)](https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1309614401) and summarized the main blocker again in [#279 (comment)](https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1326736211) .
> 
> From [#279 (comment)](https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1326736211):
> 
> > The main blocker for user script managers in MV3 compared to MV2 is the inability to run strings as code in the main world (page’s context).
> 
> However, from tophf's comments, it seems this is incomplete. If there's a mistake here, let's please work to get it clarified.
>
> I'm hoping we can reach consensus on what is required in this API. As always, there are multiple potential solutions, but the requirements should remain constant. Main world script execution of arbitrary strings is a hard requirement; I think we're all agreed on that. A separate, dedicated, secure-world communication channel (while I understand the desirability!) shouldn't be a hard requirement, since it doesn't exist in MV2 (and USMs continue to work in MV2). 

Judging by the content of your comment (https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/pull/331#discussion_r1058750599), it looks like you have a (near-)complete understanding of the gaps between MV2 and MV3 for USM, including the multiple levels of functionality (I'll respond to the levels at the end of my reply after replying to your other comments in between).

> > Since user scripts in the main world already need to account for arbitrary CSP of web pages, I don't view a custom CSP as a hard requirement for MV2->MV3 migration. I'll let @derjanb speak to the priority of this aspect.
>
> In Chromium, a script tag injected by an isolated world in MV2 can bypass some of the CSP rules of the main page (beyond just the ability to append a script tag; the appended script tag itself can do more). As I've mentioned in the past, this boundary is not well defined, but I don't know if we can reasonably say "user scripts already deal with all page CSPs". I'd similarly like to have @derjanb 's input here.

Is there any difference for `<script>` injected from ISOLATED or USER_SCRIPT world?

Side note: In Firefox. the inline `<script>` tag is always subjected to the CSP of the web page, so the proposed way of running code wouldn't result in a unified extension that works identically across browsers. That's also one of the reasons why I prefer a dedicated, intentional API for USM to run code in the main world, instead of relying on a DOM API that has special, extension-specific exceptions.

> Understood; this is why I'm trying to get a clear, crisp set of requirements. It's been mentioned multiple times that "all that's needed is to bypass main world CSP", but that seems very incomplete. Breaking down some different levels here:
>
> * Executing in the main world: trivially achievable today.
> 
> * Executing _arbitrary_ code in the main world: achievable with the proposed API (most directly and desirably by using `register` with `world: 'MAIN'`).

I think that @tophf is rating the proposal at this level. As designed, the API would give the impression that it would be at this level, but in practice, with some hacks and hoops a higher level can be reached (see below).

> * Executing _arbitrary_ code _with pre-work code / known data_: I don't believe this has (fundamentally) different requirements than the above; since the code is arbitrary, the pre-work / known data can be included directly in the arbitrary code.
> 
> * Executing _arbitrary_ code with _per-document customization_: Possible with the proposed API, if the USM leverages the USER_SCRIPT world to construct an inline script tag.  (This also enables semi-private communication between the USER_SCRIPT world and main world script, in the same way it exists in MV2.)  In the future, we'd want to improve this, but it would unblock migration.

I rate this proposal at this level. In https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/pull/331#discussion_r1058519344 I said "Not because of the greatness of the API design, but because this CSP exemption can be used as a hack to restore ... MV3 USM works exactly like the MV2 USM."

> * Executing _arbitrary_ code with _per-document customization_ that is _shared between the ISOLATED world and USER_SCRIPT world_ (this seems to be the requirement tophf highlighted): This _might_ be possible with the proposed API, depending on the functionality USMs use today in MV2.  Again, this is where I've heard many conflicting descriptions, and would like more details.  If the current mechanisms are insufficient, it seems like this would be possible with the use of the dynamic params that are proposed for the scripting API, if we also exposed them to the USER_SCRIPT world.

I think that @tophf was mainly referring to a shared channel between the main world and the USER_SCRIPT world, not USER_SCRIPT+ISOLATED. Regardless, with the proposed API it would be possible to establish an initial shared secret between the ISOLATED and USER_SCRIPT world and use the untainted DOM APIs (CustomEvent etc), provided that the USM has full control over what executes first in the USER_SCRIPT world (in contrast, in the MAIN world the USM has to be concerned about scripts from the web page). The content script and user script preamble can use a fixed secret (randomly generated and then registered with `scripting.registerContentScripts` + `userScripts.register`) and wipe that secret after reading.

> * Executing _arbitrary_ code with _a dedicated, private communicated channel with shared references to objects_: Not possible in MV2 or with the proposed API.

All hoops that USM are jumping through is to establish this level, with limited success.

I mentioned the desirability of this level before (e.g. [my previous comment in this thread](https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/pull/331#discussion_r1058695633) and in #279 including the [big comment with background](https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1309614401) and the [userscript kickoff meeting](https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1326736211)).
While I recognize the desirability of this level, I did not push this as a hard blocker since the stated objective of Google (Simeon, Emilia and you) is to unblock MV2->MV3 migration, and USM already have (hacky) logic to get somewhat close to this level.

An API that's specifically designed for USM should aim to at least be forward-compatible with this level. Moreover, since the private communication part is also useful for non-USM extensions (see #284), I would be very supportive of the capability being disconnected from the "userScript" permission.

Reviewer 5: We're converging little by little.

> The content script and user script preamble can use a fixed secret (randomly generated and then registered with scripting.registerContentScripts

Theoretically yes, but currently it doesn't allow to register `code` string in the ISOLATED world. There's also no other reliable private method to pass the data to the isolated world at document_start. As long as this is not addressed by the API proposal, it's unusable for USMs, which is what my comments were about.

Note that we don't use shared objects/references in the "private communicated channel". We just need the channel to be fully private and support structured-clonable data i.e. standard web messaging is fine as a transport. This is achievable in MV2, and this is what Violentmonkey/Tampermonkey do.

Reviewer 5: Actually, even if registerContentScripts allows registering `code`, it won't help the current API proposal when injecting in the MAIN world because dispatchEvent may be already spoofed due to https://crbug.com/1261964 at document_start or with any other run_at mode regardless of the bug (most userscripts run at document_end).

That's because of the timing, here's how Violentmonkey does it in MV2:

1. a closed shadow DOM element is created in the isolated world
2. an iframe is created inside
3. a script element is created inside the iframe
4. it runs and stores the iframe's clean prototypes in the MAIN world of the main page as `window[randomId]`
   * **it can't run earlier as the global will be seen by the page**
   * **the script must use textContent for its code** to execute synchronously, which is the only way to avoid interception of the global, so `unsafe-inline` is required in CSP of the isolated world
5. a new script element is created inside shadow DOM element
6. its code reads window[randomId] and removes it
7. it uses these safe prototypes to establish a private channel with the isolated world using another randomId embedded in the script element code
8. each userscript is executed:
   1. the isolated world sends a secure message to the MAIN world so it creates a setter for `window[randomId]`, **it can't be exposed earlier as it'll be seen by the page**
   2. a script element is created by the isolated world inside shadow DOM `window[randomId] = function (GM, GM_getValue) {....}` i.e. it assigns itself to the global, which is a setter that removes itself and calls the embedded userscript passing GM_xxx API as a parameter.

Although creation of a shadow DOM element in the very first step can be detected in the MAIN world, but only an extension that ran earlier can observe the subsequent steps and hack into the comm channel.

I don't see how the current API proposal can solve this problem without introducing a built-in safe comm channel because that `window[randomId]` must be exposed only immediately before the script is executed, otherwise some synchronous DOM event may be fired by something in-between and the main world will see the global via Object.getOwnPropertyNames.

Reviewer 5: AFAICT Here's how the proposed API can become usable for MAIN world injection assuming it doesn't implement a built-in secure comm channel:

1. https://crbug.com/1261964 must be fixed in Chrome and other browsers
2. chrome.scripting must add a setConfig method or allow `code` in registerContentScripts so we can set randomId both in the isolated and main worlds
3. As we saw in my previous comment the remaining problem is the timing of exposing window[randomId]: it must be done right before execution.
   * **[Edit] This approach won't work, see the edit below.** The simplest workaround is to register everything at document_start: 1) the isolated world controller, 2) the main world controller that exposes a registration function at `window[randomId]`, 3) the userscripts, each wrapped in something like `randomId(scriptId, function(GM) {...})`.

       This will work only if execution of all these scripts happens within one uninterruptible loop where no other scripts can run in-between and [to avoid interception by earlier executed extensions] no synchronous DOM events have an opportunity to occur. The controller will run the scripts at the correct document_xxx stage.

       **[Edit] This approach won't work** because we can't run userscripts while `window[randomId]` is exposed in the main world as they can hijack another userscript's privileges or simply remove the global. To avoid this, we need to accumulate all of them as functions, remove the global, then run the functions. This is not easy to solve within this approach, partially because it can't reliably handle the case of an uncompilable invalid syntax inside the code.

   * Another workaround is to provide a synchronous event in the isolated world that fires before executing the registered userscript so that the event handler can tell the main world controller to expose its registration as window[randomId]. See my previous comment why it must be synchronous. This workaround still requires the extension to save the safe prototypes at document_start beforehand, same as in MV2.

      **[Edit]** The event must also fire for an uncompilable syntax error inside the userscript so we can remove the global to prevent it from being exposed to the entire main world in case the error occurred in the last userscript. The event listener would be something like `({id:string, error?:string}) => {}` where `id` is the userscript id, `error` is the syntax error message.

   * Yet another workaround: a method in the isolated world to initiate injection e.g. a synchronous chrome.userScripts.run(id:string) that returns an {error?:string} object.

One inconvenience remains though: registration of the controller scripts.
* running it on all urls is wasteful if the userscripts run on just a few sites
* registerContentScripts with all the matching patterns from all userscripts combined can be wasteful if there are many userscripts each with hundreds of matches, registerContentScripts doesn't support globs

P.S. To make the API usable for the USERSCRIPT world injection only step 2 is required (setConfig) in case each userscript runs in its own world. If the world is shared, you would have to solve the abovementioned problem of exposing the global only right before execution of each script.

Reviewer 8: > Since user scripts in the main world already need to account for arbitrary CSP of web pages, I don't view a custom CSP as a hard requirement for MV2->MV3 migration.

It's not a hard-requirement. There is a GM_ API available to workaround some of the CSP issues.

> A separate, dedicated, secure-world communication channel (while I understand the desirability!) shouldn't be a hard requirement, since it doesn't exist in MV2

A secure communication channel can be created but it solely depends on the _synchronous_ code execution of the injected MAIN world code so that no other code can run in between the MAIN world code injection and its execution. Then a newly created "open secret"-based channel can be used to transmit the real secret communication key before the "open secret" becomes public to other MAIN world code ([1261964](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=1261964)+`DOMNodeInserted`). 

> That's because of the timing, here's how Violentmonkey does it in MV2:
> https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/pull/331#discussion_r1059004500

Tampermonkey uses something very similar.

So form my point of view, either the USER_SCRIPT world allows MAIN world script tag injection like the content scripts of MV2

or the proposed API allows a secret key to be shared between code injected into the USER_SCRIPT and the MAIN world.

BTW: if the injected MAIN world code is not readable by the page (API based injection), then there is no strict need for a "per-document customization". The customization can also be per-"browser start". 
The customization (i.e. the secret communication key) simply must not be part of the extension package, because otherwise bad actors could extract it.

Reviewer 6: @Rob--W 
> I think that @tophf was mainly referring to a shared channel between the main world and the USER_SCRIPT world, not USER_SCRIPT+ISOLATED

As I've mentioned, communication between the main world and user script world (via a message channel with a shared secret) is possible with the proposal today, because you can use a generated secret in the USER_SCRIPT world and embed that directly into a dynamically-generated main world script.  I don't think this is what @tophf is referring to (@tophf , please confirm).

> The content script and user script preamble can use a fixed secret (randomly generated and then registered with scripting.registerContentScripts + userScripts.register) and wipe that secret after reading.

As @tophf calls out, I don't think this works, because `scripting.registerContentScripts` (scripts to execute in the ISOLATED world) can only be static content, so they can't take a dynamically-generated secret.  However, see more on that below.

@tophf 
> here's how Violentmonkey does it in MV2:

Thank you very much for the summary!

Is there a reason the iframe creation / scripting has to happen in the ISOLATED world, or could this potentially happen in the USER_SCRIPT world?  (I understand it can't happen in the MAIN world.)

Could we obviate most concerns by allowing the USER_SCRIPT world to send messages to the extension?
1) Have everything (user script-related) run in the USER_SCRIPT world, instead of the ISOLATED world.  The creation of the private message channel works the exact same way it does in MV2 (we allow injection of unsafe-inline code from the USER_SCRIPT world, so it can create the iframe, append the script tag, and dynamically create a script element for the main world with the `randomId`).
2) Allow the USER_SCRIPT world to send messages to the extension.  To make it clear which messages these are, introduce a new message event to handle these, `runtime.onMessageUserScript` (naming TBD).
3) Any messages that need coordination with the background context go through this channel.  Any storage access that currently goes through `chrome.storage` that needs to be accessed can be proxied through here (`chrome.storage` is already entirely async).

Would this allow us to eliminate the need for three-party (ISOLATED, USER_SCRIPT, and MAIN worlds) communication entirely?  I think this preserves the security benefits of the USER_SCRIPT world (any privileged access has to go through the privileged background context, through a message handler — it even potentially makes it more obvious which messages these are, though of course there are ways to cloak it).

Note: This wouldn't allow for synchronous access to any APIs available in content scripts.  This includes some `chrome.runtime` properties and functions (`id`, `getURL`, `inIncognitoContext`), `i18n`, and `dom` (used to pierce the shadow DOM -- though I'd be amenable to opening that up to USER_SCRIPT worlds).  Are any of these critical for user script functionality?

Another, probably less appealing possibility:
@tophf  mentioned most scripts run at document_end; how important is `document_start` to guarantee?  (I see that this is only called out as "limited support" on the tampermonkey docs?)  If we needed to maintain the ISOLATED world interaction (the USER_SCRIPT world is insufficient), another option could be something like:
1) (optional) Register a content script at document_start to do some bootstrapping
2) On frame creation, use `scripting.executeScript` with a built-in function + a dynamic argument (the secret ID) to set the secret in the isolated world.  (This is inherently racy for document_start [a])
3) Have a dynamically-generated user script with the same secret ID [b]
4) Use the USER_SCRIPT world (which is proposed to have a relaxed CSP) to gather the prototypes from a newly-created iframe, as it's done in MV2, and inject the script into the main world, again, as it's done in MV2.  The private message channel can be constructed using the random ID that's been sent to the ISOLATED world and embedded dynamically in the user script to communicate.

[a] If document_start use cases are critical, this step can be substituted with the scripting params that have been proposed in the scripting API, obviating the need for the `executeScript()` call.
[b] This could be painful, depending on how frequently the secret needs to change, because it would require unregistering + reregistering the script.  If we went this route and frequent (say, per document) secret changes were required, we'd likely prioritize having one-off script execution in the USER_SCRIPT world, as is briefly called out in the proposal under future work.

Concern: Even with [a] and [b], if _both_ guaranteed document_start injection _and_ per-document switching of the secret are necessary, this can become tricky (because document_start would leverage scripting params, which would need to be changed on every document, which is, in turn, racy).

Thoughts?

@derjanb 
> So form my point of view, either the USER_SCRIPT world allows MAIN world script tag injection like the content scripts of MV2
> or the proposed API allows a secret key to be shared between code injected into the USER_SCRIPT and the MAIN world.

As I've mentioned, the proposal is for the USER_SCRIPT world to allow MAIN world script tag injection like content scripts in MV2 (i.e., bypassing the page's CSP and not subject to a minimum extension CSP).

> if the injected MAIN world code is not readable by the page (API based injection), then there is no strict need for a "per-document customization". The customization can also be per-"browser start".

If we provide something like `executeScriptInMainWorld` that's exposed to USER_SCRIPT (and/or ISOLATED) worlds, we could hide the script content from the main world page; however, as I'm sure you know, you'd still need to be cautious about all the other "gotchas" that page's might use to hook into execution.  We'd never be able to guarantee that the main world couldn't interact or affect the injected script.

Reviewer 5: @rdcronin, indeed, USER_SCRIPT world with `chrome` messaging+storage might work instead of ISOLATED as a temporary measure to unblock migration of USMs:

* sending a message from an extension origin e.g. chrome.userScripts.sendMessage(tabId, msg, {frameId}) and chrome.userScripts.connect(tabId, {name, frameId})
* if the API won't provide us with clean prototypes directly it means we still need to create the iframe, so the CSP of this world must allow `script-src 'unsafe-inline'` to create a `script` element with `textContent` - seems to be already allowed by the proposal
* if the API won't provide us a secure channel in the MAIN world (or another method of synchronously notifying the controller that injection is about to occur as explained in my comments above) it means we can't use the API to register the actual userscripts installed by the user, instead we will have to keep injecting `script` elements with inline code like we do currently in MV2 - and this must be allowed regardless of the CSP of the page.
* [preferably] fetch a `blob:` url created in the extension's background context via URL.createObjectURL (requires an offscreen document but that's outside the scope of the proposal) to pass the result of `fetch` in the background context to GM_xmlhttpRequest in the userscript because extension messaging can't send `Blob` directly.
* [preferably] the controller should run in its own world that was registered with an option to allow `chrome` access
* [preferably] each registered USERSCRIPT code runs in its own world that doesn't provide access to `chrome`
* [preferably] the controller can directly access variables/functions in the same world of the `parent` or child document; currently this works with the isolated world and allows Violentmonkey to reuse the safe prototypes from an upper document in its same-origin frames.
* [preferably] create `link`, `script`, `style` elements even if their `src` or `href` or contents violates CSP of the page so that the users don't have to nuke the site's CSP header altogether.

Things like chrome.runtime.id or getURL or chrome.dom or chrome.i18n aren't necessary in this world for Violentmonkey. The id and other strings may be embedded anyway when registering via chrome.userScripts since it allows a code string that we can amend.

> how important is document_start to guarantee?

Generally, it's critical for a few popular scripts that fix annoyances, block tracking/fingerprinting/ads, tricky popups/popunders, etc.

> dynamically-generated secret

I guess the reason to change it frequently is to fight an elaborate attack like Spectre so the result from a compromised origin cannot be reused in another frame. I'm not an expert, so I don't know how plausible it is to perform. If this is unrealistic we could use the same secret that we generated when a new userscript was installed by the user.

> executeScript

Why not allow `func` + `args` in chrome.scripting.registerContentScripts?

Reviewer 8: @rdcronin

> Would this allow us to eliminate the need for three-party (ISOLATED, USER_SCRIPT, and MAIN worlds) communication entirely? 
>  This wouldn't allow for synchronous access to any APIs available in content scripts. [...] Are any of these critical for user script functionality?

None of the mentioned ones is critical, but as @tophf mentioned a replacement for `runtime.sendMessage` and if possible `runtime.connect` is required.

I'm however not sure that empowering the USER_SCRIPT world to become a "ISOLATED world" light is the right way.
If you ask me (and it's also part of @tophf's preferably list), then userscripts should be executed in the USER_SCRIPT world some day and be able to access the MAIN world via a iframe contentWindow-like object. 
This way userscripts would have a clean environment and prototypes. And if the USM can control the CSP of the USER_SCRIPT world, it can use it now to emulate MV2 behavior (run in MAIN_WORLD) and once the MAIN_WORLD "contentWindow" is available run them in the USER_SCRIPT world. 

> I see that this is only called out as "limited support" on the tampermonkey docs? 

Content script (and the initial main world script) injection needs to be at `document_start`. 
The docs mention limited support for `document_start` userscript injection because the scripts can not be transferred synchronously to the content script (except if using the cookie+objectURL hack for critical scripts). Therefore userscripts might run later than `document_start`.

> We'd never be able to guarantee that the main world couldn't interact or affect the injected script.

I know. That's why we are working on a future path to improve this. 😉 This is also another chance to advertise my MAIN_WORLD contentWindow. 😁

Reviewer 6: Okay, this seems promising : )

I think this is worth pursuing as a way to unblock MV3 migration for USMs, and once this initial phase is agreed upon, we can begin iterating on enhancements to make it better and move more towards a future where the browser can take on more of the injection responsibilities.

Concretely, how about we update this PR to include:
1) The ability to register/unregister/configure user script objects (`userScripts.register()`, `userScripts.unregister()`, `userScripts.getScripts()`, `userScripts.update()`).  This is largely unchanged from the current draft (though perhaps we should add a `file` parameter to the registered script, to reflect how it is more likely to be used at first).
2) The ability to relax CSP in the user script world *and* control whether any extension APIs are exposed.  I suggest we handle both of these with the `configureWorld()` function by changing the argument to be an object like `{ csp?: string, enableMessaging?: bool }`.  If `csp` is undefined, the isolated world CSP is used; if `enableMessaging` is undefined or false, no extension APIs are exposed.  if `csp` is defined, that CSP is used in the USER_SCRIPT world.  If `enableMessaging` is true, we expose `chrome.runtime.sendMessage()` and `chrome.runtime.connect()`.  Here, I'm suggesting the `runtime` variants here, instead of something like `userScripts.sendMessage`, to align more with the existing pattern used by both web pages and content scripts; I'm open to bikeshedding this.  I suggest `enableMessaging` (and not `enableAPIs`) to account for more flexibility in the future, e.g. whether the extension may want to control if the `dom` API is exposed.
3) Introducing a new event for _receiving_ messages from user scripts (similar to the prior art of `runtime.onMessageExternal`).  `userScripts.onMessage` and `userScripts.onConnect` make sense to me, but I could see an argument for following the pattern of runtime here, too, and introducing a `runtime.onUserScriptMessage()` and `runtime.onUserScriptConnect`.

With these changes, USMs will be able to migrate to MV3, but will have to continue jumping through the same hoops they do today.  It would be possible that a few user script injections could be delegated to the browser by registering them with world: main if they were ones that didn't require any communication with the extension; I don't know how easily that can be determined from the user script metadata.

Subsequently, file new issues (or reuse existing ones) for some of the items we've discussed for future improvements:
1) Allow user scripts to inject in unique worlds.  I'd propose we do this by the introduction of a `worldId` in `userScripts.register()`; user scripts with the same `worldId` inject in the same world.  If undefined, user scripts are injected into the default user script world (say, ID 0).  `configureWorld` can then be expanded with a `worldId` to allow configuring individual worlds' properties (both CSP and availability of APIs).  I think this is a relatively straigthforward and desirable change, with the open questions of performance.
2) Providing an explicit API for an extension to execute code in the main world from a USER_SCRIPT world (or ISOLATED world).  Apart from bikeshedding, I think this is fairly straightforward.
3) A mechanism for USER_SCRIPT worlds to fetch or receive data from blobs.
4) A secure communication channel for extension scripts to use between worlds.
5) Establish common behaviors for the CSP of scripts injected into the main world by an extension (it seems there's some difference in how this works between browsers today).  This ties into @tophf 's request for "create link, script, style elements even if their src or href or contents violates CSP of the page so that the users don't have to nuke the site's CSP header altogether."
6) Provide a way for the USER_SCRIPT (or ISOLATED) world to directly access the main world (e.g. via an iframe contentWindow-like object).

Some of these will take more work and discussion than others (and I'm honestly not sure how feasible 6) is), but I think it's worth discussing all of them.

With this, we'd unblock this first iteration of the userScripts API, enable USMs to migrate to MV3, and have a road forward to future improvements where the browser can take progressively more responsibility for the USM injection.

Does that sound reasonable?

Reviewer 4: @rdcronin Your proposal looks great! Would you mind creating a new PR with your proposal? Then we can close/archive the current state of this PR, along with the discussion and very useful thread here for future reference.

In the update, could you also explicitly mention the desired behavior with regards to:
- persistence of the registrations (e.g. `persistAcrossSessions`). I guess that the behavior is to persist for as long as possible?
- order of execution: is it the order in the order of registration? Is the order reflected in `getScripts()`? What happens when modified by `update()`? If needed, future work could be to add a method to re-order scripts (if desired by USM).

Other remarks:
- The current version lists one `code` (and maybe one `file`). Would it make sense to support a list of scripts, e.g. `js: [ {file: "first.js"}, {code: "console.log('2nd');" }]` ? The latter is used in Firefox's existing `userScripts.register` method at https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/userScripts/register#parameters (but I'm willing to consider a different shape).

Author: This discussion is addressed in the latest [commit](253ddc4d39a814c1d8471927927a1b763245d84d).
Resolving this discussion for now.

Reviewer 4: I've marked this thread as unresolved, because otherwise the permalinks in the ToC are broken. I'd like the discussions to be easily referenced because the arguments and discussion are significant in the design and shape of the final API design.

#### B. The ability to execute code (with a separate CSP) in a world different from the main world and the extension's isolated world

##### `USER_SCRIPT` World

- Isolated from the web page (similar to other isolated worlds), but will be un-permissioned.  It will not have access to any extension APIs or cross-origin exceptions (these don't exist in Chrome, but do in other browsers).
- Exempt from the page's CSP (see [Relax CSP](#relax-csp)).
- Share DOM with the web page.  Code from both worlds cannot directly interact with each other, except through DOM APIs.

> - Can communicate with different JS worlds via [`window.postMessage()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/postMessage).  A dedicated API to communicate between worlds is being considered as part of future work.

Reviewer 4: `window.postMessage` should not be recommended. It can easily be eavesdropped + intercepted by the web page (see #77).

To communicate between worlds, `CustomEvent` can be used (Ctrl-F CustomEvent at https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279#issuecomment-1309614401), but that is only secure if the two scripts (user script + privileged side, e.g. content script) can keep a secret. For the USER_SCRIPT world, this is somewhat possible, because web pages cannot access the USER_SCRIPT world.

For the MAIN world, this requires the user script to both have access to the secret (unique per execution of the script, so it cannot be added with the proposed script registration method!) AND more importantly: DOM APIs that have not been tampered with.

When a content script controls the script execution, it can use existing DOM APIs to try and set up a secure environment with such access, but that is not possible when the browser controls the injection without alternative.

Reviewer 3: ## In defence of the current proposal

[`window.postMessage`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/postMessage) has the argument `targetOrigin`.
Maybe it can be made use of by using that argument to specify the exact userscript.

## Using an `Event` is also a bad idea:

1. It's synchronous to pass data
2. There's no way to respond to a request. Instead it's close to being in a UDP message passing system. 
3.  There's no delivery guarantees (well... postmessage() also doesn't but it's a bad thing of both) 
4. There's no way to pass data without serialization (no transferrable content allowed)
   1.  This can be horrible for `XMLHTTPRequest` or `fetch` performance

## So I propose:
If you want to present an alternative, present [`MessagePort`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/MessagePort)!

Asynchronous message passing which has transferrable capabilities and the destination is the owner of the other side of the port.
Conceptually simple that solves all of these issues except this one:

How to deliver the port to each side?

Reviewer 5: > In defence of the current proposal

The proposal doesn't provide secure way of using any kind of messaging so you're not really defending it. Even with postMessage origin, we can't target userscripts in the main world as their origin is not unique. Also, when such a main world's userscript sends a postMessage to the extension's content script in the isolated world, the extension can't be sure that the message wasn't faked by a hostile unrelated script.

> It's synchronous

Userscript managers such as Violentmonkey/Tampermonkey still need it to implement the classic Greasemonkey API, which is used by the majority of userscripts, many of which will never be updated. There are many other cases when a synchronous response is required, which is why CustomEvent exists on equal terms with asynchronous methods.

There's nothing bad about synchronous communication because the actual internal work under the hood is identical for both asynchronous and synchronous methods, the only reason why postMessage or MessageChannel are asynchronous is because they are designed for cross-origin communication where environments use a different OS thread/process. In the same JS environment postMessage may be effectively slower than CustomEvent due to the former being much more complicated inside and the requirement to deliver the message in a separate event loop task per the specification.

> There's no way to respond to a request

Simply send a message back immediately (it's synchronous as well) or add an id to every message.

> There's no delivery guarantees

The extension has added a listener, so there is a guarantee.

> There's no way to pass data without serialization

Indeed - in case you mean _structured cloning_ - but passing a Blob of any size takes just 1ms via CustomEvent or postMessage because blobs are pointers to data not the data itself. To pass other binary types of data we can wrap it in a Blob, probably.

> How to deliver the port to each side?

That's the essence of the problem: the API should provide a secure method of communication.

Reviewer 3: @tophf : Fair enough 🙂

When an asymmetric security relationship may exist, the `MAIN` world is considered to be less privileged than the `USER_SCRIPT` world.

##### Relax CSP

```

> browser.userScripts.configureWorld(

Reviewer 4: In practice, user script managers will always override this. This does therefore not need to be a runtime API, and can be a static value that an extension specifies in manifest.json, as suggested above. Being a static value in `manifest.json` makes it easier to audit for its usage.

Author: This is answered in [comment](https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/pull/331/files#r1053593836)

1. **Better set developer expectations.**  The clear separation between user and content scripts will reduce confusion for developers for which API methods to use and what the capabilities / restrictions of each are.  This naming also more clearly communicates that this capability is not meant as a general purpose way to inject arbitrary scripts.

2. **Stronger enforcement of remotely hosted code abuse.**  A distinct namespace allows people to more clearly see where user scripts features are being used and more easily spot abuse patterns.

3. **Easier engineering implementation.**  Browser vendors should be able to restrict the execution world and different API methods behind features.

4. **Introduce a user script world with custom CSP.**  Allow user scripts to opt-in to a more secure world that is only available in this namespace.

### API Schema

#### Types

```
dictionary RegisteredUserScript {
  boolean? allFrames;
  ScriptSource[] js;
  string[]? excludeMatches;
  string id;
  string[]? matches;
  // Default to `document_idle`
  RunAt runAt;
  // Allows `USER_SCRIPT` (default) and `MAIN`
  // and returns error for `ISOLATED`.
  ExecutionWorld? world;

>   // Implemented as disjunctions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  // Implemented as disjunction: runs in documents whose URL matches
  // "matches" or "includeGlobs", and not "excludeMatches" nor "excludeGlobs".
```

Small suggested edit to rule out ambiguity.

  string[]? includeGlobs;
  string[]? excludeGlobs;
}
dictionary UserScriptFilter {
  string[]? ids;
}
// Errors if both code and file are specified.
dictionary ScriptSource {
  string code;

>   string file;

Reviewer 4: Specify `file` to be a relative URL; relative to the extension root? (opposed to an absolute URL or a URL relative to the current execution context).

>   string file;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
// Must specify exactly one of: `file` or `code`.
dictionary ScriptSource {
  string? code;
  string? file;
```

Since optional parameters have explicitly been flagged as such above, let's also add `?` here.

}
```

#### Methods

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When `callback` is omitted from these methods, a `Promise` is returned instead of `undefined`.

```

In Chrome's MV2, `callback` used to be the only way to pass results back to the caller.
Starting from MV3, support for `Promise`s have been added, but for backwards-compatibility, the `callback` parameter is still supported. When a callback is passed, the returned value is `undefined`. This mixed return type does not need to be documented explicitly, but it would be good to acknowledge it. (FYI: Chrome's IDL uses `supportsPromises`, Safari's IDL uses `ReturnsPromiseWhenCallbackIsOmitted`, Firefox's JSON uses the `async` key).

Here is how the (auto-generated) documentation looks like: https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/reference/scripting/#method-getRegisteredContentScripts-callback

Author: Good catch! The actual wording in the documentation may be more in terms with [`scripting.getRegisteredContentScripts`](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/reference/scripting/#method-getRegisteredContentScripts-callback:~:text=Promise%3CRegisteredContentScript%5B%5D%3E-,In%20Manifest%20V3%20and%20later%2C%20return%20a%20Promise%20by%20omitting%20the%20callback%20argument.%20The%20type%20inside%20the%20Promise%20is%20the%20same%20as%20the%201st%20argument%20to%20callback.,-insertCSS). Good to add this to the proposal.

```
browser.userScripts.register(
  scripts: RegisteredUserScript[],
  callback?: function
)
browser.userScripts.unregister(
  filter?: UserScriptFilter[],
  callback?: function
)
browser.userScripts.getScripts(
  filter?: UserScriptFilter[],

>   callback?: function

Reviewer 4: While the other methods look like they're going to not return any value to the callback/Promise, this one does not.

```suggestion
  callback?: function // called with (RegisteredUserScript[]).
```

Or if you'd like to document the return type through the `Promise` syntax, `Promise<RegisteredUserScript[]>`

)
browser.userScripts.update(

>   scripts?: RegisteredUserScript[],

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  scripts: RegisteredUserScript[],
```

`update` only makes sense when a value is passed.

Author: Typo. You are correct.

- Can communicate with the extension using extension messaging APIs (expanded under [Messaging](#Messaging)).
- Isolated from the web page (similar to other isolated worlds), but will be largely un-permissioned. It will not have access to any extension APIs, except messaging APIs mentioned, and will not have any cross-origin exceptions (these don't exist in Chrome, but do in other browsers).  In the future, we may bring more APIs (such as chrome.dom APIs or a dedicated API to execute a script in the main world), but these APIs will not grant any additional privilege to the script beyond what it has to access the page content.
- Can communicate with different JS worlds via `window.postMessage()`. A dedicated API to communicate between worlds is being considered as part of future work.
- Shares DOM with the web page.  Code from both worlds cannot directly interact with each other, except through DOM APIs.
- When an asymmetric security relationship may exist, the `MAIN` world is considered to be less privileged than the `USER_SCRIPT` world

##### Configuration

```
browser.userScripts.configureWorld(
  csp?: string
  enableMessaging?: bool

> )

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
browser.userScripts.configureWorld({
  csp?: string,
  enableMessaging?: boolean,
})
```

The parameters should be passed through a dictionary, not as positional arguments.

Reviewer 5: Also, it should be just `messaging` because it's not a verb/method but just an option, same as `csp` is not `setCSP`.

Reviewer 6: +1 to being a dictionary (I think this was just a mis-transcription; the proposal in our mega-thread above did have this as a dict).

Re messaging vs enableMessaging: I slightly disagree.  I view these as properties for the configuration of the world.  The property of CSP is a string — the value of the CSP.  That is, "CSP is 'default-src self'".  Similarly, the property of whether to enable messaging is a boolean, but "Messaging is true" sounds a little awkward and doesn't make as much sense to me, where as "enableMessaging is true" makes it more obvious.  Arguably, we could make this an enum ("MessagingBehavior is Enable" or similar), but that seems unnecessary here (and is harder for developers to type out).

Reviewer 5: >"Messaging is true" sounds a little awkward

"enableMessaging is true" is just as awkward, but it's uselessly verbose and misleadingly implies there can be "disableMessaging is true".

Reviewer 5: Option names are not prefixed with "enable" unless it's an action. In the extensions API there are only a couple of such cases in DNR (enableRulesetIds, enableRuleIds) because there is a complementary `disable` action'y option.

And I see Chromium devs have already made the same mistake in [enableGranularPermissions](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/reference/identity/#type-TokenDetails).

Non-actionable options may have `Enabled` suffix, although it's also an unnecessary fluff.

```

> where

Reviewer 4: Also add a note that the configuration is supposed to persist across sessions, similarly to the registered scripts.

Author: Done.

- If csp is defined, it is used in the `USER_SCRIPT` world. Otherwise, the `ISOLATED` world CSP is used.
- If `enableMessaging` is true, messaging APIs are exposed. Otherwise, if false or undefined, messaging APIs are not exposed.
In the future, if we allow multiple user script worlds (see section in Future Work below), this method can be expanded to allow for a user script world identifier to customize a single user script world.

##### Messaging

> User scripts can send messages to the extension using extension messaging APIs: `browser.runtime.sendMessage()` and `browser.runtime.connect()`. We leverage the runtime API (instead of introducing new userScripts.onMessage- and userScripts.sendMessage-style values) in order to keep extension messaging in the same API.  There is precedent in this (using the same API namespace to send messages from a different (and less trusted) context, as chrome.runtime is also the API used to send messages from web pages.

Reviewer 4: I think that it makes more sense to add a new namespace for messaging with the `userScripts` API, instead of `runtime.sendMessage`/`connect`, for the following reasons:
- If future work introduces additional functionality, it would need a namespace to hold the methods. We may as well introduce the namespace now, e.g. `userScriptContent`.
- In this API, eventually code will be running in the `MAIN` world and the `USER_SCRIPTS` world. It may be confusing if `runtime.sendMessage`/`connect` from `MAIN` triggers `runtime.onMessageExternal`/`runtime.onConnectExternal`, while exactly the same code triggers `runtime.onUserScriptMessage`/`runtime.onUserScriptConnect` in `USER_SCRIPT` (... and `runtime.onMessage`/`runtime.onConnect` in `ISOLATED_WORLD` through content scripts, e.g. the `scripting` API).
  - I already see frequent confusion among developers who do not understand the difference between the `runtime.sendMessage`/`connect` APIs in web pages vs content scripts, where the observable difference is that the former requires an `extensionId` parameter.
- The `extensionId` parameter allows communication with other extensions. Since the method is explicitly meant to be used by user script managers, I don't think that this would be desirable. This could easily be addressed at the implementation level by rejecting the `extensionId` parameter, but good luck with documenting that...

What do y'all think of these APIs instead:

- `browser.userScriptContent.sendMessage` / `connect`
- `browser.userScripts.onMessage` / `onConnect`

Reviewer 6: I strongly feel we should not add yet-another namespace for this.  I think documenting the differentiation between userScriptContent and userScripts would be extremely difficult.  I also think that having the API go from two different namespaces (userScriptsContent.sendMessage -> userScripts.onMessage) is very confusing.

I don't think that reusing the existing runtime methods is perfect, either — I think each have their challenges, but because IMO there's no clear right choice, I'd prefer to go for the one that is more consistent and involves fewer pieces.

No matter what, there will be some confusion — having the messaging API exposed on a different namespace makes it different than sending a message from any other context, where you can always use chrome.runtime.  In any of these cases, we'll need documentation, and developers will need to learn the different conventions.  I prefer leveraging chrome.runtime because:
- It's more inline with existing messaging behavior, overall (extension frames / SWs and content scripts both use chrome.runtime to send messages)
- It avoids the need to introduce new API namespaces and the confusion that spans from that
- It's simpler implementation-wise, leading to less risk of skew between different messaging APIs

I also think there's good potential here with the [getContexts() API](https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/pull/334) and messaging changes we're planning there (allowing the extension to target a specific context) and this work — for sending messages from an extension frame or SW to a user script, we can leverage that API.  Looking farther down the road, I think it'd make sense to have _only_ `runtime.sendMessage()` and `runtime.connect()` and to use these with targeted contexts.  I don't suggest we do this yet (it's a very breaking change), but I think we can take steps in that direction.

> Extensions can receive messages from user scripts with new event handlers: `browser.runtime.onUserScriptMessage()` and `browser.runtime.onUserScriptConnect()`. We want new events instead of using `browser.runtime.onMessage()` to make it clear the message is coming from a user script in a less-trusted context.  There is precedent for this in the form of onMessageExternal and onConnect external.

Reviewer 4: The other messaging APIs are attached to `runtime` because there is no more fitting namespace where they could be added. Despite the `runtime` API being available to every extension context (including the lower-privileged `ISOLATED` world), the intent is to only expose these events to privileged extension contexts, right?

### Browser level restrictions

From here, each browser vendor should be able to implement their own restrictions.  Chrome is exploring limiting the access to this API when the user has enabled developer mode (bug), but permission grants are outside of the scope of this API proposal.

## (Potential) Future Enhancements

### `USER_SCRIPT`/ `ISOLATED` World Communication

In the future, we may want to provide a more straightforward path for communication with a `USER_SCRIPT` world (as opposed to the [`window.postMessage()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/postMessage) approach highlighted above).

### Separate `USER_SCRIPT` Worlds

In addition to specifying the execution world of `USER_SCRIPT`, we could allow extensions to inject in unique worlds by providing an identifier.  Scripts injected with the same identifier would inject in the same world, while scripts with different world identifiers inject in different worlds.  This would allow for greater isolation between user scripts (if, for instance, the user had multiple unrelated user scripts injecting on the same page).

### Execute user scripts one time

> Currently, user scripts are registered and executed every time it matches the origin in a persistent way.  We may explore a way to execute a user script only one time to provide a new capability to user scripts (e.g `browser.userScripts.execute()`).

Reviewer 9: This is something that is already possible in MV2 (using content scripts and eval). Since the goal of this proposal is to achieve functional parity with MV2, shouldn't this be part of the main proposal?

Author: Agreed, this is a feature gap.  We'll open a new PR to discuss it, since a) it may or may not go on the user script API (and might instead go on scripting) and b) it doesn't block development of the User Script API

### Establish common behaviors for the CSP of scripts injected into the main world by an extension

Create certain HTML elements even if their src, href or contents violates CSP of the page so that the users don't have to nuke the site's CSP header altogether.

### Dedicated API to execute code in the `MAIN` world from another world

Provide an explicit API for an extension to execute code on the main world from a `USER_SCRIPT` or `ISOLATED` world.

### Direct access to the `MAIN` world from another world

Provide a way for the `USER_SCRIPT` or `ISOLATED` world to directly access the MAIN world (e.g. via an iframe contentWindow-like object).

## Discussion Guidelines

> Please keep discussion to the first iteration introduced by this proposal.  Future enhancements can be tracked in the WECG [issue tracker](https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is the first iteration of the userScripts API designed in https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues/279.
Future enhancements can be tracked in the WECG [issue tracker](https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/issues).
```

After this PR is merged, the discussion suggestion looks strange. Here is a suggested rephrase, but feel free to edit further or drop the section altogether.

- Can communicate with different JS worlds via `window.postMessage()`. A dedicated API to communicate between worlds is being considered as part of future work.
- Shares DOM with the web page.  Code from both worlds cannot directly interact with each other, except through DOM APIs.
- When an asymmetric security relationship may exist, the `MAIN` world is considered to be less privileged than the `USER_SCRIPT` world

##### Configuration

```
browser.userScripts.configureWorld({
  csp?: string,
  messaging?: boolean,
})
```
where
- If csp is defined, it is used in the `USER_SCRIPT` world. Otherwise, the `ISOLATED` world CSP is used.
- If `messaging` is true, messaging APIs are exposed. Otherwise, if false or undefined, messaging APIs are not exposed.
- Configuration persists across sessions.

> In the future, if we allow multiple user script worlds (see section in Future Work below), this method can be expanded to allow for a user script world identifier to customize a single user script world.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

In the future, if we allow multiple user script worlds (see section in Future Work below), this method can be expanded to allow for a user script world identifier to customize a single user script world.
```

Added a blank line to prevent the paragraph from being merged with the preceding bullet point in the rendered markdown output.

```
dictionary RegisteredUserScript {
  boolean? allFrames;

>   ScriptSource[] js;

Reviewer 10: Could this be `script`? `js` is a little terse and a bit limiting if we ever wanted to support WASM code for example.

Reviewer 4: I don't mind `js` here, but if a name change is desired, make it plural, e.g. `scripts` or `scriptSources`.

Author: `js` goes in terms with
a. [Scripting API](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/reference/scripting/#type-RegisteredContentScript:~:text=generated%20script%20IDs.-,js,These%20are%20injected%20in%20the%20order%20they%20appear%20in%20this%20array.,-matches)
b. [Firefox user scripts API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/userScripts/register#:~:text=js,code%20to%20register.)
We are also already differentiating between `js` and `css` in `scripting.registerContentScripts`. For WASM we could use a separate parameter, since it's not a scripting language like Javascript (binary code). WDYT?

Reviewer 10: Makes sense. `js` works for me.
